>> Exciting new scientific
research is finally showing
the efficacy of an
age-old practice--
biofield healing.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Humans have been
using various forms
of energy healing for eons.
Today, the emerging field
of biofield medicine
is ushering in serious
scientific inquiry.
Dr. Shamini Jain is a
researcher and founder
of the Consciousness
and Healing Initiative,
a collaborative of leading
scientists and practitioners
seeking to expand understandings
of biofield healing.
She is the author of the new
book, "Healing Ourselves".
>> The biofield is a new term
that's been coined by Western
scientists to explain what
really is a very age-old
concept that aligns across
traditions around the world.
And that is that the biofield
is really a set of fields.
It's a set of interpenetrating
and interacting
fields of energy and information
that connect us and heal us.
So we can talk about and
explore the biofield of a cell,
the biofield of a person,
even the biofield of a tree,
or the biofield of the Earth.
And what's really
cool about it is we
can look at these interactions
between our biofields.
We can look at the
biofields between cells.
biofields between us.
And we can look at the biofields
between us and the Earth.
And it turns out when
we start exploring
those things in science, we
learn about healing effects.
We learn how our
connection actually heals.
>> Cyndi Dale is an energy
healer and intuitive who has
been working with the biofield
subtle energies for decades.
>> To me, energy is
information that moves.
Now, Einstein said it forever
ago everything is energy.
It's just a matter of how
measurable or not measurable
it is.
So these days, we've subdivided
those types of energy
into subtle energy, which
is 99.999% of an object
or of a person, versus
so-called physical energy, which
is really simply denser energy.
So we're increasingly being able
to measure subtle energy, which
is really, really exciting.
First of all, we're explaining
it in terms of quantum physics
because subtle energy is
really most like quantum,
which are the
smallest units, not
just of matter but of energy.
So therefore, some of the
quantum wave particles
can move faster than
the speed of light.
But they all carry
information or data.
>> Biofield healing can take
various forms of working with
energy.
These include Reiki,
acupuncture, healing touch,
and chronic healing
amongst others.
Scientists are now
looking at ways
in which this healing
might work right
down to the cellular level.
>> We're
bioelectromagnetic beings.
Even our bones are piezoelectric
and our cells give off charge.
As it turns out, we can
actually even manipulate,
for lack of a better term, work
with the charge in our cells
to grow new neural tissue.
We have chemicals that
run around in the body.
But as it turns
out in, many cases,
it's actually the
electromagnetic charge
that might drive the chemicals
to move from one cell
to another.
So as we begin to
explore the biofield,
there's so much to learn.
How does energy
get under the skin?
The research shows that it does.
How does that work?
How does that happen?
Honestly, from a
scientific point of view,
we still don't really
have the answers.
We need to find out.
>> While much still remains to
be discovered about the exact
mechanisms by which
biofield healing works,
emerging research is
showing that it does.
Studies have shown the
efficacy of biofield therapies
in dramatically reversing
fatigue in breast cancer
survivors, improving immune
function in patients receiving
chemotherapy, and reducing
PTSD symptoms in active duty
military.
>> Some of the most cutting edge
work that's being done right
now with biofield therapies
in terms of how they affect us
on the cellular level is being
done at MD Anderson Cancer
Center under the direction
of Dr. Lorenzo Cohen.
They found that in fact
healing, bioenergetic healing,
could reduce tumors in
a mouse model of cancer.
>> At the core of understanding
biofield healing is
the connection to consciousness.
>> Ancient systems of not
only spirituality but medicine
understood the fundamental
aspect of consciousness
for our health and healing.
They're working
with consciousness,
they're allowing for an
expansion of consciousness
not just in themselves
but also in the client
that they're working with.
And through that expansion
of consciousness,
the field begins
to expand as well.
As the field expands, what we
call in our tradition samskaras
or vasanas, habit patterns,
karmic attachments, these sorts
of things, they begin
to show themselves
as those begin to
be let go, energy
comes back into the system.
As those blockages begin
to remove themselves,
we begin to see healing on the
emotional, mental, and physical
levels.
>> Proponents of biofield
science are excited about
the future of the field and
passionate about the need
for more rigorous
scientific study.
>> When we start investing
in biofield science,
we're going to see new solutions
for regenerative medicine.
We're going to see new solutions
for mental and physical health
epidemics because the central
understanding of the biofield
is that we are truly connected.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.